[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Is it possible to really
have happiness in this life?
Well, we have some
help for you if you
think you'd like to try it.
We have Dr. Robert Thurman
who has written a book called
"Inner Revolution--
Life, Liberty, and the
Pursuit of Real Happiness."
Dr. Thurman is a internationally
recognized scholar.
He's a professor at
Columbia University.
He is an author and
he is a translator.
And he was the first
American to have ever been
ordained as a Buddhist monk.
Welcome to "Wisdom."
>> Well, thank you, Corinne.
It's very nice to be here
with you this morning.
>> Now, I think it's important
to start off by not thinking
that everybody knows
what Buddhism is.
And, in particular,
who was Buddha?
>> Right.
Well, I think you're
right, Corinne.
Buddha was a prince trained--
actually, he was like
a military cadet.
And he was a prince
trained to be a king.
And when he was 29, he decided
that there must be something
more to life than just
running his kingdom,
having fun with his wife--
and wives, actually,
in that ancient time--
and then dying.
So he said I've
got to go and find
the higher meaning to things.
Or if there is none,
then I'll find that out.
And he took a vacation
at the age of 29.
And after six years
of meditating,
he said, wow, I really have
understood what it's all about.
I'm really glad I did this.
And I'm very happy to
announce that all of you
can find out what it's all
about and that all of you
can get away from this
sort of nagging anxiety
and unpleasant time
that you're having.
And you can have real
happiness in this life
and for all your future lives.
He made that kind
of an announcement.
He was so happy.
He was euphoric,
actually, he was so happy.
And then following
on that, Corinne,
over the following 2,500
years in many countries,
many people decided to
make use of those methods
to sort of get away from
the bad situation of feeling
separate from the universe,
feeling that you have
to fight with the
universe, and feeling
that you're losing that fight.
And instead, they discovered
a way of becoming harmonious
with the universe and
really feel successful,
in a way, in your existence,
and attain nirvana, as they say,
the extinguishment
of this kind of
unnecessary personal suffering.
And so many people were able
to do that that it became
a very vastly popular movement.
And it has the kind of
the reputation, Corinne,
of being a religion
by Westerners.
We think of it as a religion.
It sort of fits
in our categories.
And it can, to some
degree, be a religion.
But from the Buddha's
point of view
and the major
teachers of Buddhism,
it's thought of more as
a system of education,
how to reeducate yourself
not to have a miserable life
and, instead, have a
pleasant and happy life.
>> So you can be a jew and be a
Buddhist or follow the Buddhist
teachings?
>> It depends on
how you define it.
The way I define it, the way
the Dalai Lama defines it, yes,
you can be a Jew and
you can be a Buddhist.
The way someone
would define it who
would think of it
as a religion, where
you have to have a certain
credo and so forth,
then, no, you have to be
either a Jew or a Buddhist.
But even then, you can
use methods from Buddhism
and be a better Jew.
>> Or a better Catholic.
>> Or a better Catholic,
or a better Muslim,
or a better Hindu,
whatever it might be--
>> I remember a lot--
>> Or a better
humanist, actually.
You know, you can be a
secular humanist in a way
and use methods from Buddhism
about moral, meditational, and
intellectual methods,
psychological methods,
and you can be better at
whatever it is you do.
>> You know, almost every book
that comes past my desk these
days, it's either about Buddhism
or it is written by someone who
has learned something
from Buddhism.
What is happening?
>> I don't know.
It's coming out of
the woodwork, I guess.
Well, you know,
Arnold Toynbee said,
Corinne, that the 20th
century in later--
25th century historians looking
back at the 20th century,
they would say that
the greatest thing that
happened in the 20th century was
not the telephone, the TV, what
have you, it was the encounter
by the Western EuroAmerican
culture with Buddhism
from Asia that
would be the greatest event
that would mark the succeeding
number of centuries.
And a lot of people might be
very paranoid about that idea,
particularly Christians, or
some orthodox Jews, in that they
would think that, oh,
dear, that means we're all
going to somehow supposed
to convert to this religion,
you see.
Which is why I think it's
very important to get away
from the idea that
it's just a religion.
I mean I teach about Buddhism
in a university in a department
of religion, because
people are thinking
that it was some sort
of belief system,
which is how
religion is defined,
that is used in Asian countries.
You know what I mean?
So I teach the history
and what they do there.
But really, I should be teaching
in a philosophy department,
or a psychology department,
or some sort of human science
department really
rather than a religion.
Because really
what Buddhism is is
the science of the human
mind, the human emotions,
how they work.
It relates also to biology, to
medicine, to many other things.
And it really is a science.
Now, the reason I think it's
becoming so well known now
in America is that, I think,
we are a little discouraged
with our own native
psychology, which really
is very constrained by its
philosophy of materialism
and really boils down to Prozac.
Take some sort of a chemical
that will alter your mood
and that's supposed
to solve your problem.
The insurance
companies won't even
pay for you to go and talk
to a therapist anymore,
because they've sort of
given up on people's having
a soul and et cetera, you know?
So our psychology runs counter
to our moral and religious
imperatives.
And the moral and religious ones
tell you you should be moral,
you should be kind, you
shouldn't be too selfish.
And the psychologist says
you should be selfish,
you should have a big ego,
and you should run around
to be aggressive.
And both of them seem
sort of too extreme.
And in the middle of that,
Buddhism comes along.
And it gives us a
practical method
of how we can be less selfish,
and more moral, and more
happy as a psychological
necessity, not just
as a sort of a way of
behaving, if you follow me.
>> How do we do that, Bob?
>> Well, the main thing
we have to do, Corinne,
the main thing that is the inner
revolution that I write about
in my "Inner Revolution" book
is we have to turn around from
being self-obsessed and
perceiving the world only from
our own perspective where we
think that everything revolves
around me.
I should have everything.
And no one should
do anything to me.
I don't want this kind of thing.
And once I'm in
that frame of mind,
what the Buddha
discovered is once I'm
in a frame of mind like that--
which some people think is
only natural or inevitable that
everyone automatically is--
but he discovered that
that frame of mind
leads to suffering inevitably.
Why?
Because the universe is not
going to be swallowed by me.
The universe is not going
to do what I want it to do.
And so when I think
it should, I'm
going to be always
in conflict with it.
And I'm going to
lose that conflict.
I'm going to die.
I'm going to get sick.
Friends are going to leave me.
Enemies are going
to come up to me.
And so as long as I think that
it should revolve around me,
I'm going to be in
stress because I'm
going to be out of
touch with reality.
If I can shift
that over, not just
on the basis of a kind
of an act of willpower,
but on the basis
of understanding
the salaciousness, the
erroneousness of thinking
that I'm so special,
do you follow me?
And realize it's not
that I don't exist
or that I'm not
special, it's just
that I'm no more special
than everything else.
I'm interactive
with other things.
And I exist relatively and
relationally with other things.
When I really viscerally
understand that, Corinne,
you see suddenly my relationship
with everything completely
changes.
And things are rewarding
to me and friendly to me.
And I can be happy with
them instead of in conflict
with them.
Do you follow me?
In other words, say
you and I, Corinne,
are two different people.
If I think somehow
my well-being depends
on kind of suppressing you or
doing something against you,
you and I will be in
stress all the time.
But if I feel, well,
you and I are connected.
And actually, if
you're in a good mood,
and cheery, and happy,
that improves my mood.
If you get something
out of whatever it is,
I get something out of it.
And we're more
exchanging like that,
then I'm not in
conflict with you.
Then, in fact,
enhancing your situation
enhances my situation.
>> But you go on at great length
in your book "Inner Revolution"
about how people have to get
away from the community and get
back to the individual and the
education of the individual.
That kind of runs counter
to what you're just saying.
>> That's very good.
In a way, it seems to at
first, you're correct.
But the reason being
that, normally,
in many, many
communities-- like, say,
a communist society or
an ancient society that
is what we call a
very collectivistic,
that is to say the
individual is meant
to submerge their
self-interest in life
very much under some
duties to the community.
Under that situation,
you see, the person
is still really feeling
that they should
be the center of the universe.
And then they're
suppressing that feeling
and doing something for the
community under pressure.
And then that only adds to
their sense of unhappiness,
do you follow me?
So why I say, ancient
Indian society
based on Buddha's insight was
more individualistic, actually,
than America or any place.
Because what it said
was human beings
are such an amazing,
evolutionary phenomenon
that they should
use that human life
to come to a realistic
understanding of themselves.
And once they do, then they
can contribute far more
to any community than they
possibly could being miserable,
and suppressed, and coerced.
So therefore, an
intelligent society
releases its
individuals as much as
possible to come to their
own self-understanding
and fulfillment,
because it knows
that once they're educated,
and once they really understand
their relationship
with the universe,
they will make so much greater
a contribution voluntarily
and willingly to the
community than they ever
would have as just a coerced
slave of some sort of community
duty.
So that's the paradox
in there, Corinne.
First, you need to let the
person have plenty of room
to discover their situation.
And once they do, then
you can count on the fact
that they will be loving,
and friendly, and happy.
And they'll do a lot for you.
Do you follow me?
>> Yes.
>> Whereas if you
try to force them--
>> Hold that force.
Because they are forcing us
to close here for a minute.
>> OK.
>> We've been talking to Dr.
Robert Thurman who is a great
scholar of Buddhism and a
great scholar in general.
He is the author of
"Inner Revolution."
And we'd like you to
stay around to find out
how you can get happy.
We'll be right back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're talking to Dr.
Robert Thurman who
is the author of "Inner
Revolution Life, Liberty,
and the Pursuit of
Real Happiness."
Welcome back.
>> Thank you, Corinne.
Very happy to be here.
>> Bob, you know,
this all sounds very,
very good what you're
saying, all this theory.
>> That's excellent.
>> There's somebody out
here who's watching this.
>> Yes.
>> And he's saying, "Yeah,
but what do I do tonight?"
>> Right.
>> How can I take what you're
saying, you great scholar,
you great professor at
Columbia University,
how do I apply it to the fact
that I'm in a 9 to 5 job.
I really don't like
the job too much.
My wife is mad.
My kids are flunking in school.
How do I use this?
>> Well, one of the
things, Corinne,
that I must say is that the
Buddha has a kind of bad rap
in America because people think
that he thought life was yucky,
life sucks.
You know, it's suffering.
It's awful.
But actually, he didn't
say that just to be mean.
In other words, no
one but a sadist
would go out-- if they thought
really that life sucked,
they would go out and sort
of say, well, it does suck
and there's nothing
you can do about it.
The reason is that what he
meant to say-- what he did say
was the unenlightened
life sucks.
If you insist on
being an egomaniac,
you're going to have
a hell of a hard time,
basically, is what he's saying.
>> Why?
>> Because the world is not
going to agree with your ego.
And you're going
to, therefore, never
have enough out of the world.
You'll never be satisfied.
You'll be afraid other
people will come after you.
And you'll be defensive
and aggressive with them.
>> But when I get the
right relationship,
I'm going to be happy.
>> Really?
You think that the other
person will make you happy?
But then will they
ever satisfy you?
Do these relationships
ever satisfy?
When you yourself are
the victim of having
to have something outside of
yourself to make you happy,
then how long does
it last, you see?
In other words, this is the
key insight of the Buddha.
It's your own inner state that
determines whether you're happy
or not.
In other words, if you are
a really loving person,
then, it will be easy to
have the right relationship
because other people
will really like you,
because you'll be loving
and loving towards them.
If you are a person who
is very self-centered
and you say, well, I want the
right person to make me happy,
everybody you try to find
will become disgusted with you
very shortly, because
they don't want to just
be there making you happy.
They're looking for
someone to make them happy.
You follow me?
So in other words, you'll
never get enough of each other
if you're both in it for what is
the other one going to give me.
That isn't love.
That's possessiveness.
That's attachment.
So the key point here
is if you understand
your interconnectedness
with the world,
and if you understand that
your own state of mind
is where real
happiness comes from
or real suffering
comes from, then you
go to work on your
own state of mind.
If your kids are flunking, you
try to be more kind to them.
You try to help them study.
You sort of become content
with whatever it is.
You affirm that you'd
love them nevertheless,
no matter what they do.
You give them a
sense of support.
You don't scream and freak out
and intimidate them, et cetera.
In other words, if you have
the sources of happiness,
the wellsprings of happiness
in your own inner contentment,
your own inner
self-sufficiency, so to speak,
then the world won't
bother you that much.
You can take whatever
it is and then
you'll naturally be
such a cheerful person
that you'll gravitate
towards more friendly people.
And you will actually
have better relationships.
But the key to it is, Corinne,
that the Buddha said, well,
now I understand, it is
the self-centeredness,
this self-preoccupation that
makes people discontented
all the time and dissatisfied.
For example, Corinne,
you know that when
you've been having a good
time, when you're happy,
what is that one surefire
way to be miserable?
Stop to think how happy you are.
Oh, am I as happy
as I was yesterday?
Oh, could I be more happy?
>> I wonder how long
this is going to last.
>> How long is it?
Then, immediately, you're
miserable because you
know it won't last that long.
It could be better.
It has been better.
This relationship is it
great, as good as it could be?
Oh, no, maybe I should have a
relationship with another one
and another one.
Divorce number one,
two, three, four, five,
it goes on and on like that
because the self-seeking,
the feeling that you must
be dependent on outer things
for your happiness is
an insatiable thing.
What Mick Jagger, you
can't get no satisfaction
if you're just grabbing
for satisfaction.
If you have an inner
sense of contentment,
and you're going to
make the best of it,
you see the half full
in the glass, then you
you'll be happy no matter what.
And Buddha said even
you can pursue that--
which is a commonsense
thing, which we all
know-- he gave us methods that
you can pursue to develop that
by developing a way of
getting free, breaking free
from the inner voices
of discontentment,
the inner voices of
self-preoccupation,
by meditation and
by understanding.
And the more you
break through, you
can be so contented that you
can take almost anything.
Which, therefore,
ironically, enables
you to choose the things that
are even externally good.
>> I was surprised.
I had never read in any
of these books before--
>> Yes.
>> --that you said that Buddha
really advised you to get rid
of all negative
people in your life.
>> Well, that's helpful, yes.
You might as well.
>> Never heard that before.
>> I know.
Well, actually, when you say get
rid of, you have to remember--
>> Avoid them.
>> Yeah, avoid them
for the time being.
And actually, once you get
really positive yourself,
you can turn any negative
person into a positive person.
Like a mother has
a brat there who's
having a tantrum,
who's pretty negative.
They're, like, wah.
Even though their own beloved
thing, but they're a brat.
Now, a mother can work around
that mood of that brat.
If she really loves
him, she can cheer
him or her up and et cetera.
Pretty soon, they are like
being friendly and nice
and they're not having
a tantrum anymore,
without necessarily
giving them everything.
Just giving them what they
want for the tantrum is
no good, because then they'll
have a worse tantrum later.
In a way, it's weakening them.
It's making them dependent
on only getting that thing
and doesn't teach them
how to control themselves.
So if you become very
positive, Corinne,
when you're a very loving,
and cheerful, and positive,
you can get to work around
even negative people.
And you can get rid
of negative people
by not getting rid of them, just
getting rid of the negativity.
That's the best way.
In fact, in Buddhism
in the long run,
because they have
this interesting
view that we are infinitely
interconnected with each other.
You know?
You and I, Corinne, have done
this TV show billions of times
in trillions of former lives.
And we're going to do it
again another million times
in future lives.
So therefore, we'll never
get out of each other's face,
in the Buddhist view.
Therefore, we should try to
make the best of our interaction
so that the next time
it's even better,
the next time it's even better.
Instead, if I blow you
off or you blow me off,
then next life we come
back and we're mad as hell.
And it's much worse, you see.
So Buddhism has this gentle
nonviolent thing of feeling
infinitely connected
with everybody.
And so therefore, you kind
of make the best of them.
On the other hand, if
someone really drives you
up the war in the short run and
you can't cultivate yourself,
because they make you so jumpy,
then it's better to avoid them.
Discretion is the
better part of valor.
Buddhism is really very
much commonsensical stuff,
but enforced with scientific
psychological technology.
>> You know one of the things
that I thought was interesting
about your book is you have a
whole big section here on what
you call a ideal
political platform.
>> That's right, Corinne.
It's my enlightenment party
platform for the year 2000.
>> Do you think it
will ever happen?
>> Yes, of course, it will.
It might not this
planet, this year
2000, but maybe the next
planet, the next year 2000.
Sooner or later, it will happen.
>> You know what I
liked was the one part--
you have to pay taxes under
your political platform,
but you get to choose
what your taxes support.
>> That's right.
>> And you give the
government three choices.
>> Right.
>> I loved that.
>> Isn't that nice?
>> Yes.
>> It's a consensual tax system.
And it's sort of like voting
for where it should go.
You say I want it
to go for this.
Some people would want
to pay for defense.
Some people will want to
pay for schools and not
for defense, et cetera.
And if you give people
the sense that they're
supporting what they want,
then you'll have more
cheerful taxpayers, we hope.
>> And the fact that Buddhism
really does not support
anything like
capital punishment.
>> No, Buddhism is nonviolent.
It's against violence.
That doesn't mean,
Corinne, that, for example,
if some maniac is about
to kill your family
and the only way
you can stop them--
if you happen to have a
weapon-- is kill them.
Actually, although it's
a sin to kill them,
and you shouldn't do it
with hatred in your heart,
you should move energetically
and blow them away
to save your family
in self-defense.
Capital punishment
is unpleasant,
because you already
have them under arrest,
under confinement.
And you could actually use
every educational method
at that your
psychology knows to try
to rehabilitate them and make
them genuinely repentant,
and make them genuinely
kind, and make up for it
to the world and all this.
And yet, when they're
in your power like that
and they really can't
hurt another person,
you then go and
vindictively kill them.
That's what Buddhism
really doesn't
like about that,
because in a way
it kind of encourages the
killer attitude because it says,
if you have the
power over somebody
and you can kill them, well,
you might as well, you see.
And that's why Buddhism really
objected to capital punishment.
>> And also the prison reforms
that are not being utilized.
>> That's right.
Our prisons are too much based
on punishing people rather than
rehabilitating them,
although we have
the theory of rehabilitation.
But in Buddhism,
2,000 years ago,
in certain kingdoms where
they listened to the Buddhist
teachers, they banned
capital punishment
and they had a
rehabilitated prison system.
And they had the idea
that every prisoner
should be treated
like a wayward child
and, therefore, made to
be reeducated and grow up
in a proper way rather
than being killed off.
And I think that's
very, very important.
Actually, if I had my way,
Corinne, Columbia University
or any university
would have a branch
where the faculty would
teach one course a year
to some maximum
security prisoners.
So that anybody
who went to prison
would be forced to be
educated more and more.
And all of the junior
professors, all community
colleges, would be
built next to prisons.
And that there would be a
major emphasis on reeducating
as many prisoners as possible.
I know for a fact from
prison psychologists,
I've studied it a little
bit, the one thing that
lowers the recidivism rate
of prisoners who are released
and then commit more
crimes and come back
is if there's some sort
of educational program
in that prison where
they gain a trade.
They gain knowledge.
They learn some skill.
They read, et cetera.
It's gaining a sense of control
over their own minds and lives
through being educated is the
one thing that saves people
from a life of crime.
And we're very short-sighted
nowadays because of demagogic
politicians who say
like these commercials--
>> Lock them up.
>> --where they slam
prison doors and stuff.
And they act like that
solved the problem.
Meanwhile, it costs
us $60,000 a year
to keep someone
locked up in a prison,
twice the tuition at
Harvard or Columbia.
>> When are you going
to run for office?
>> Well, not for
a while, Corinne,
because I don't think they're
ready for a Buddhist studies
professor.
But I'd be happy
if Ross Perot would
like to bankroll me and give me
a platform to explain my ideas.
Then at least if I could
be a good influence
on Al Gore or the young
Bush, the new Bush, whoever
is going to run,
whoever might win,
then I'd be happy to
have that influence.
Because one of the
things, I think, I feel,
that holds our
politicians back is
that the public is kind of
too complacent and apathetic.
And the public has this
attitude that they're all
going to do nothing
worthwhile, a,
and, b, that there's nothing you
can do about almost anything.
And that is a very negative
attitude that causes us--
in the past, when America
has succeeded well
and things is when we've had
the attitude that we can succeed
and then we have.
>> Thank you so much.
I'll vote for you when you run.
>> All right.
Thank you, Corinne.
I'll let you know if I run.
>> We have had a wonderful
time today talking to Dr.
Robert Thurman about
lots of things,
but mostly about his book
"Inner Revolution Life, Liberty,
and the Pursuit of
Real Happiness."
As I always tell
you around here,
we bring you miracles
on this show.
Keep coming back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]